If someone was to make a fully functioning
quantum computer tomorrow, then at least at
the moment, we wouldn't have all that much we
could do with it. I left quantum Computing in
2020 after finishing an applied maths PhD in that
field from Cambridge University. And the thing is,
I'd loved being a researcher and I
even got offered a few postdocs kind
of informally when I was thinking about
leaving, but I still decided to leave.
And the reason is because I became a little
bit concerned that maybe quantum computers
aren't gonna be as useful in the real
world as we might have hoped. Well,
it's been five years and a lot has happened
in quantum computing. So I want to go back
and see if my assessment from back then is
really still looking like it's gonna be true.
So yeah, on the hardware front, I think things
are actually going really well. In 2020,
when I left, most quantum computing
companies only had like. Dozens of
qubits. I think the state of the
art might have been like around 50,
but now there are companies that have like 10
times that, and what's even more impressive
is that most companies seem to be on track with
what they said they would be able to do in 2025.
I mean, I'm not an expert in that area, but
it seems like despite all the incredible
challenges engineering wise, to make it
happen. These companies are doing it,
which is awesome. I have no idea when fully
functioning quantum computers will be built,
but some people say 10 years or 20 years,
and I have no reason not to believe that.
I think that we really are on track, but on
the software front. I think things have been
much more disappointing. To explain why I need to
explain one of the most misunderstood things about
quantum computers. Quantum computers are not
just general purpose super computers. It's not
like every single thing that you do on a regular
computer can be done faster on a quantum computer.
Like you can't play games faster on a quantum
computer. In fact, quantum computers are very
specialized at doing very specific tasks, and
I wanna explain a little bit about quantum
computers so you can see why that is. I'm not
gonna explain what a qubit is or anything like
that because if you wanna see a full explanation
of like exactly how a quantum computer works, then
I have a video that you can watch where I built
a small kind of useless quantum computer at home.
And hopefully that explains it a little bit
better. But right now what I wanna do is give
you an overview of like how you should be thinking
about what a quantum computer can do and what it
can't do. Let's say that this is a normal computer
that does this algorithm. Every time you put in a
bit string, if I put that into my computer, I type
it in, then it will output some other bit string.
There's some sort of computation that this
program is doing to the bit string to make
it something else. Well, what happens when
you replace this computation with the quantum
version of this computation? So let's say
this is my amazing quantum computer. It acts
in a very similar way where if you put in this
bit string, you'll get out another bit string.
But the thing that you can do with
quantum computers that you can't,
with a classical computer is you can put
in more than one input at a time. In fact,
you can put in every possible bit string
and the output, instead of being a single
number will a combination of. All of the
outputs for every single one of the inputs.
This seems miraculous, right? Like you can
do an exponential amount of computation
with the same amount of resources that a regular
computer would take to just do one computation.
This seems like there needs to be some sort of
catch, and there is, you see, it is true that
a quantum computer truly does do this whole
amount of computation all at the same time.
The problem is when you try and ask the
quantum computer what the answer is,
so with a regular computer, you might expect
it just outputs this whole thing in a way
that's readable. But with a quantum computer,
you have to then go and measure this output.
And when you measure it, what happens is it
collapses to just one of these things randomly.
So all the rest is completely gone, and you
just have one number that comes out and it's
just a random computation, and that is not
useful. You see, even though technically a
quantum computer really does do a huge amount of
parallel computation at once with the same cost
that a regular computer would take to just
do one computation, it's not possible to.
Easily extract all that information. In fact,
you can extract very little from the output,
and if you do it in the naive way of
just trying to look at the answer,
you just get a random answer. So, how are quantum
computers ever going to be useful then? It turns
out for very particular types of computations
that it is possible to extract just slightly
more information from this whole huge list that
lets you actually get out something very useful.
This is my second sponsorship for
the charity farm kind and they told
me that last time loads of you donated,
which is so awesome. Thank you so much.
So almost no one thinks it's okay for chickens
to live in horribly crammed cages like this for
their entire lives, where they can barely
even move. But it's still really common.
This report from June of 2025 by the USDA says
that about 55% of all egg laying hens are in cages
like these. The mission of Farm Kind is to prevent
these kind of cruelties in the most effective
way possible. They research which charities
have actually made the biggest difference for
animals. And then when you donate to Farm Kind,
they split that money amongst these charities.
So for example, the Humane League, they
run campaigns that have pressured the
likes of McDonald's, Walmart, and Nestle
to treating their hands better. The track
record is so good that they can prevent
a chicken from living her entire life in
one of these terrible cages for just 85 cents.
It often feels like we can't change the world,
but for the individual animals
that your donations will help.
It makes all of the difference. So if you wanna
donate, the link is in the description and I
would really appreciate it. Now, back to the
video. Let me give you the classic example,
Shor's factoring algorithm. So the
problem that Shor's algorithm is
trying to solve is called factoring.
So say I give you this massive number.
Then the factoring problem asks, what are
the two numbers that you have to multiply
to get that massive number? In other words,
can you factorized this number? And it turns
out this is really hard to do on a classical
computer. Like, yes, you can do it by sort
of just checking every single factor,
but that will take you ages and ages.
But in 1999, Peter Shor showed that
actually you can solve this problem
quite quickly on a quantum computer.
The first step of that algorithm does
look like putting in a huge super position
of all the inputs into a quantum computer
and calculating the output. But the next
step is not to just go and measure this,
because as we already saw, doing that just
collapses the state and is totally useless.
So instead, Shor's algorithm uses
a very clever way of manipulating
this state further. So you put this back into.
Another quantum computer doing a whole lot more
steps and you end up with. Some sort of quantum
state here, where now it is possible to measure
this state and actually get out a little bit of
useful information, and that is just enough to
find out how to factorized that huge number.
But the point is you have to come up with some
very clever manipulation at this part of the
quantum computer, a particular algorithm
that is going to take out just the useful
bit of information so that at the end you
can read out what that information is.
Designing this algorithm is hard and it depends
exactly what the problem you wanna solve is,
and some problems like factoring
have turned out to be amenable.
So it turns out there are a bunch of problems
like that where we have been able to come up
with some very clever quantum algorithm
that does let us extract the information
we want and solve the problem. But
for most hard problems that you might
wanna solve with a quantum computer. We
haven't yet found quantum algorithms.
That might be because no one has yet
found it, or it could be that there is
no algorithm to find that quantum computers
just can't solve that class of problem,
and we never know which it is until
someone eventually finds a quantum
algorithm for that problem. So you can see
why quantum algorithm design is quite tricky.
You really never know which problems
you're going to be able to solve with
a quantum computer or not. When
Shaw's algorithm came out in 1994,
there was a lot of enthusiasm that we would be
able to find many more problems like factoring
that quantum computers would be able to do
so much better than classical computers.
And yet, by the time I was leaving my PhD in
2020, I was pretty disappointed by the lack of
progress. There were of course, other quantum
algorithms like for example, phase estimation,
which is actually very related to Shor's factoring
algorithm, and also another one called Hamiltonian
simulation, which is quite different and
allows you to simulate quantum objects.
I. Now, five years later, I wanna go back
and see if, well, there's any new algorithms,
but also whether there have been new
applications found for the existing
algorithms. And the spoiler is, I think
it's been a little bit disappointing,
but there have been some hopeful signs.
Let's start with quantum machine learning.
So we've all seen how incredibly good AI
systems are, and I think there's this worry
that sometimes gets brought up in the media
that when we have full quantum computers,
we're going to have these supercharged ais. In
fact, when I was in the field, quantum machine
learning was super popular and there seemed to be
papers being churned out about it all the time.
But I was very, very skeptical that
any of those would amount to much,
because I just don't think that quantum computers
are very well suited to machine learning problems.
Quantum computers often exploit structure
and you know, machine learning algorithms
are all about putting in. Tons of data and
the data isn't particularly structured.
It's like whatever examples, for example, from
the internet. So I just don't think this is
playing to quantum computer's strength,
and it seems like more and more people
have gone off this quantum machine learning
idea. So I don't think that's gonna be a big
deal. But there is another area that gets
heaps of hype that may be more justified.
In fact, when I was in quantum computing,
this was the area of quantum computing I was
most excited for, and which I was ultimately
most disappointed by. It's quantum chemistry.
Simulating molecules is a big deal, for
example, in medicine where you wanna see
how a particular drug is going to interact
with, for example, proteins in your body.
And so there was a lot of promise about
quantum computers being able to speed up
these very important, um, chemical simulations.
At the time, that seemed justified to me because
quantum computers are able to do something
called ground state energy estimation,
and they seem to do it exponentially
more quickly than a classical computer.
But it turned out, there's actually an
assumption in there that kind of makes
the whole thing invalid. So let me explain. Say
you had these two chemicals and you wanna know
what's the chance that they're going to bond
together and how hard is it gonna be to make
them do that? One way to get a handle on that is
to estimate the energy of both of these states.
So you can look at this state and you can look
at its energy and you can look at this whole
state and look at its energy. And if this energy
is significantly lower than that one, then it's
more likely to end up in this state. Estimating
these ground state energies is super important,
and there's a quantum algorithm called phase
estimation that seems to do it super well.
This is the gist of it. You put in a blank qubit
that you're going to write the answer onto, and
you also put in this qubit, which is in the ground
state. If you have this ground state and the blank
qubit, you can just put them straight into your
quantum computer That does phase estimation,
and then the blank qubit ends up coming out
of this computation with the ground state
energy just ridden straight onto it, and you can
read that out and find out what the energy was.
So this seems perfect because this algorithm
runs really fast, and so it seems like you
can find out the ground state energy of
any molecules, which would be huge. But
unfortunately the trick is this thing. So this
is a state, a qubit state, which represents
the ground state of the molecules. In
other words, you need to already know.
What the ground state of those molecules
is to be able to run this algorithm. You
can kind of see the problem, right? But
at the time I thought that this would be
fine because there are ways to estimate
what the ground state would look like
more or less. And as long as there's a good
overlap between your guess and the reality,
then you end up with something that
is good enough to find the energy.
But there's no guarantee that your guests
and the actual ground state will have all
that much overlap. It was actually a couple of
friends of mine who weren't in quantum computing,
but did know a whole lot about chemistry
and biology that actually pointed this out
to me. They made me see that there's actually
no guarantee that this overlap is big, and so
it's not clear at all that quantum computers
can solve this ground state energy problem.
And in fact, in 2022 there was a paper
called. Is there evidence for exponential
quantum advantage? And it was written by a whole
lot of very respected scientists in the quantum
computing field and also in chemistry. And so
their conclusion was this. We conclude that
evidence for such an exponential advantage
across chemical space has yet to be found.
While quantum computers may still prove
useful for quantum chemistry. It may be
prudent to assume exponential speedups are
not generically available for this problem.
So yeah, quantum computers aren't
actually a silver bullet for solving
quantum chemistry problems, but there is
a class of problems that's quite related
that quantum computers are surprisingly
good at, and that's quantum simulations.
Quantum simulations are actually what
inspired quantum computing. The idea is
simple. Quantum systems are actually very
hard to simulate in general if you try to,
for example, simulate what a bunch of
electrons are doing when they interact
with each other. Quantum mechanically,
you find that on a regular computer.
This is really, really hard to do. The
number of possible states inside of the
super position become exponential, and so
it's hard even on a classical computer to
write down all of these states. And so
quantum simulation has always been a
difficult problem. But for a quantum
computer, it's actually quite easy.
So what quantum computers can do is they
can simulate the way that electrons evolve
by having their qubits sort of interact with each
other in a similar way. And by doing that analog,
they can give us a pretty good picture of
what the original electrons would've done,
and this turns out to be very useful.
So here are some examples of what we might do
with quantum simulations. So you might have
heard of these things called superconductors.
Superconductors are these kind of magical
materials that have no electrical resistance.
That means that when you use them in a circuit,
they don't lose energy. But the problem
with superconductors is that the ones
that we know of have to be cooled
down quite a lot to actually work.
So one thing people dream of is coming up
with high temperature superconductors. So
we just have to figure out the exact materials
to use to make the superconductor so that it has
zero resistance even at room temperature.
So. And quantum computers might help with
that because it's really hard to simulate these
kind of materials before you actually make them.
Because of those problems I was talking
about earlier. It's hard to figure out
what the electrons are all doing,
and so the easiest way to do it at
the moment is just to make all of these
materials and then test them in the lab.
But that's really difficult when there's so many
different materials that you can make and test.
So the idea is that, you know, once we
eventually have a quantum computer. We
would be able to basically just computer
simulate what all of these different
materials are gonna do and then just
pick out the most promising candidates
to use in the lab. And I think that
that's a very exciting application.
There are similar problems like this, like
for example, solar cells. You might know
that at the moment our solar cells are like
somewhere around, I think 20 to 25% efficient,
which is pretty good. Like they can take 25% of
the energy that falls on them and convert that
into electricity. But that is actually near
the limit of what's possible with silicon.
The hope is that we'll be able to find
different types of solar cells that have better
efficiencies, and people have already started
working on these and have examples of them,
but hopefully once we have quantum computers,
we'll be able to simulate way more materials
and find something with really high efficiency
because computing the efficiency that a particular
material is going to have before you actually
make it in the lab and test it is again very hard.
There's many other examples like that, like for
example, nitrogen fixation. We wanna figure out
how we can do that much more efficiently than the
current harbor brush process. And there's also
applications inside of science. So for example,
you might have heard that quantum computers can be
used to simulate some models of black holes, and
that may be somewhat useful for, you know, people
who are studying this to understand what kind of
behavior those sort of black holes would have.
So yeah, I think that there are actually
a lot of applications in this area that
are very promising. So that is great. This
isn't a new algorithm. Hamiltonian simulation
is a fairly old algorithm. Where are the
new algorithms? Well, amazingly and very
unexpectedly in the last five years, there
has been at least one new algorithm, so.
In 2023, a group of researchers proved
that a particular problem with a random
oracle could be solved on a quantum
computer exponentially faster than
could be solved on a classical one. That
is really cool as a theoretical result.
But this random Oracle bit means that it
can't actually be made in practice still.
I am actually really hopeful
about that because usually when
there are algorithms of this sort where
they're sort of relative to some oracle,
often people come up with a way to take that
idea and put it into a practical algorithm.
Like I think Shaw's algorithm even came out
of sort of Oracle like results like that.
So that's proof that there really are
other quantum algorithms out there,
and I think it's really exciting.
If you work in quantum computing,
you might have worried that like most of my
videos sounded quite negative and I'm really
sorry about that. I actually don't wanna
come down too hard on quantum computing.
I just think that there has been a bit of
a misallocation where a lot of work has,
of course, gone into the hardware because
it's a very hard problem and a lot of work
has gone into, for example, quantum error
correction, but it just seems like quantum
algorithms have been neglected. If a
quantum computer appeared tomorrow,
we need things that we're going
to use that quantum computer for.
So we need to be searching
for good quantum algorithms,
but at least when I was in the field. It wasn't
very popular to work on quantum algorithms,
and that's because it had a reputation
for being really hard, which makes sense
because so few algorithms have been found,
and even when new algorithms are found,
often there's a mistake with them or people show
that actually classical computers can do that too.
And so it's quite a hard field to be working in,
but I think it's one of the most important. So,
yeah, I'm hopeful about quantum computers, but I
think that there is a lot of work left to be done.